This is an interview with Colonel Herbert L.
Curry, United States Marine Corps, by Brian W.
Icarus on April 29, 1989, at the Trigon Building,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
concerning the Vietnam War. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge about the war, I am going
to donate this tape to Texas A&M Oral History
Collection in the University Archives. Is that
all right with you, sir? Yes, sir. Sir, you had
previously stated in the interview given by James
W. Hodges, Jr. on November 29, 1988, that your
first experience in Vietnam in 1963 was with the
3rd Recon Battalion and the underwater
demolition teams of the Navy. It has been stated by
other sources that during these years, even the
special warfare units had difficulties
performing. Would you please expand on that, sir?
Yes, I will. First,
under the conditions that I was operating, we
didn't have difficulties before me, at least not
difficulties with the South Vietnamese. We
operated from the board ship on a daily basis. The
underwater demolition folks conducted
hydrographic surveys from the high water mark of
the beach out to the sea. or possible landing sites
or landing beaches my platoon and i conducted
reconnaissance from the high water mark of the
beach up to 10 miles inward we would go in select
routes of egress determine trafficability away
from the beach select terrain objectives recon
towns villages airfields any type of military
that was placed in that area. The only difficulty
that we encountered was that there would be
Vietnamese in the area, Vietnamese military in
the area. They were unaware that we were operating
in there at the same time. There was not a
communications set up between the ship that I was
operating from and the local Vietnamese military
forces ashore. So we were operating
independently, and sometimes we would have a
chance meeting with Vietnamese, and they weren't
aware that we were in the area. On one occasion, I
was on a road about five or six miles inland, and
coming around at the end was a military jeep with an
army Vietnamese captain. stopped and said, hey,
we've got a big battle going on just around the
curve and over that hill. And we had no knowledge of
that, so we had no intelligence.
And Vietnam was in a war at that time, and yet the US
forces were in there operating. So did I have
trouble operating? No, I didn't, because I was
operating from sea on a daily basis. My logistical
support was there. We were well taken care of. But
as far as any interface with the Vietnamese, we
didn't have that, nor did we have any intelligence
being given to us about what the area was like or was
there any enemy forces in the area at that time. I
understand it's not the recon's mission to engage
the enemy, but were there such encounters? Yes. We
had a couple of encounters. One time we were in the
Marble Mountain area, and we received some
gunfire,
and we immediately departed the area, got back to
our rubber boats, and went out to sea. Another time
we were in the Mekong Delta area, south of Vung Tau,
Half of my platoon got pinned down for an excess of a
day. We were drawn from the mangrove swamps. We
were on the beach, and the tide was out, and the
tidal flap was such, or the tidal range was such, or
the beach gradient was such that we couldn't get
boats in to evacuate the people. So we had to remain
undercover throughout the day until the tide came
in and we could evacuate the people. Yes, it was our
mission not to engage We were strictly to have
thousands of them. Sir, what were the basic
differences between activities while you were a
platoon commander of a recon unit and a company
commander of an infantry unit? Which benefited
you the most in dealing with the war?
Well, I can't say that one benefited me more than
the other. Because I had been in Vietnam as a second
lieutenant, I knew something about the people. I
knew what the country and the planet were like. And
that gave me some first-hand knowledge on how to
operate there. I came back several years later as a
captain and a company commander. I had more
experience at that time. Plus, I'd gone through
three weeks of specialized Marine Corps training
at Camp Hillary, California. which was to prepare
people to go into Vietnam. We had courses on,
classes on the culture of the people, the do's and
don'ts, and how to react with people, because we
were over there to win the hearts and minds, as well
as to win military. We also had infiltration
courses, courses that trained us in detecting and
avoiding moving traps and mines.
So I felt that I was pretty well-prepared when I
went to Vietnam. Still, there is nothing like
on-the-job experience in combat whenever you get
over that. Nothing truly compares you for
everything in combat. So when you're asking for a
comparison between being a company commander in
combat and being a platoon commander with
reconnaissance equipment as a second
lieutenant, there is no comparison. All right, so
I guess that will kind of lead into my next question
now. On your return to Vietnam in 1968, what were
the noticeable differences then and your first
experience in 1963? In 1963,
I had gone in. One of the missions had gone in to the
Bay Airfield. or the military air base there in the
northern
portion of South Vietnam. It was basically a
sleepy village, oriental village. The airfield,
although there was a war going on, was fairly
enacted by the U.S.
I was amazed when I flew in. in 1968, January of
1968. As I recall, there had been another airstrip
prepared parallel to
the original airstrip.
It was an air base in the city of Busting Rock City.
I was really, I was amazed what America could do
when it was mobilized
and eventually made. We had rocket crushers,
postal services, clubs, exchanges, large
organizations, lots of jets flying in and out,
coming in on those runways. The transformation
was like day in, night out. Is there any different
from what it was like in 1963, as in that you were
located down in them. But I guess the real question
I'm asking is the attitude in the people and, I
guess, the change in the war atmosphere.
I didn't have that much contact with the people in
1968 and 1969. When I was there in 1963, the
people still lived throughout the countryside.
because the war was not at the intensity that it was
in 68 and 69. But when I got there in 68, I found that
we still had Vietnamese living in the name, and
they were allowed to travel Route 1, but there were
checkpoints that controlled their travel, and
they all actively seized at nighttime. Around the
name, people still lived in villages But we had had
what we called the CAP program at that time. That
was Combined Action. But we took a squad of Marines
and had them living at each village to train them in
self-defense. The people would work their bills
and crops in the daytime, and then they would
return to their village, and all movement would
cease after dark. Anything we knew was considered
hostile for those Vietnamese, US forces, as well
as the the local forces, what we call the PLs, I
guess that's the popular forces, that were
defending their little village of Hamlet. Later
on in the year, when I moved up to the northern
I-Corps, in the area from Guaviette north and
Guaviette west of the Laotian border, I found that
there were no villagers or people living in
villages. They had all been taken from the
countryside and taken to resettlement areas.
These are camps that the U.S., I guess in
conjunction with the U.S. Army, had constructed
where they relocated everyone and they lived
there. They lived there until the war was over. So
in Northern I-Corps, there was no local populace
out in the countryside. If we saw anyone, he was
hostile. He was considered the authority of the
leaves. Did this have any conflict with such
villages or groups of Indians such as the
Montagnards who were really not active in the war?
I didn't get up into the mountain area where the
Montagnards were working.
To my knowledge,
they were not resettled. I think they remain in the
mountains. Special forces working there. They
were not located in the area. So I just don't have
any knowledge or information. In the field, I
understand that many the commanding officers
were thought of as kings, and that whatever they
said was the ultimate word. Did you feel or see any
such power? Oh, absolutely.
I can call their lives. I can determine when they
can go out of the field, when they can return to the
United States. I found when I took over my company
conditions as far as the welfare
of the Marines were cautious.
Sanitation was poor. Personal sanitation was
poor. They weren't well fed, and there were ways to
take care of the troops whenever they were in the
field. You required them to go out there and cut
their hair. You required them to shave every day.
we operated
in the field continuously very seldom did we ever
go back to a camp area where we could change clothes
and take a shower when we did that was the first
thing we did but also had fresh clothes blown into
us where we just take off our old clothes put them
back on and put them on a helicopter from shipping
out to Washington and fresh them. I had a different
type of rations in there other than the old C
rations that we made. They were called the B
rations. You got the dehydrated foods, hamburger
patties, rice, ketchup, mustard, beans, things
like that to supplement the C rations.
The C rations is a high-nutrition, well-balanced
ration. But it gets old. There are 12 types of
meals, and that's all you get. And I was determined
when I got there to eat those meals to keep my health
up. And I found after three months in the field that
I was even being selective in what I ate. And when
you become selective, then you don't get that
balanced diet that you ate in the spring. When that
happens, people get sores. They get injured.
Those injuries become sores, and you might have to
evacuate someone to be treated because you get big
sores.
With the change of diet, we've corrected all of
that. Another example, during the monsoons when
it's so wet, you can get immersion, but you stay wet
all the time. I had people... Our eyes should be on
three pairs of socks, and we changed three times a
day. Me on the move, your feet would get wet every
time we would stop and take your socks off. But on a
fresh pair, you'd rain those socks out and tuck
them down on the inside of your trousers where your
body would cause the moisture to evaporate. So you
always had a dry pair when we were back in Iowa.
tactical position not on the move or have certain
forces out that means you have certain a certain
percentage of your company my company in fact i'd
have to take your boots and socks off use foot
powder and let there be there i think you do that all
day every day whenever they weren't uh on the move
that's a fairly emergent problem but had i not done
something like that people would have well i
Whenever I took over my company, people were being
medevaced on the helicopter that I came in on
because they had a mission.
Did you command your men, or how did you motivate
them to fight?
Well, I obviously commanded them. As in, how did
you command and motivate them to fight? First of
all, I... I sat high standards. I maintained those
standards. When I took over the company, I felt it
was a drag tag outfit. They had long hair. They had
not shaven in days, maybe a week.
The previous company commander had allowed these
conditions to exist. I felt their morale was down.
I went in there and raised the standards. I said,
when you're not in contact with the enemy, we will
shave every day.
We got haircuts. We had flippers sent out to us so
that whenever we weren't fighting, we could get
haircuts and maintain our hygiene. It didn't take
long for the troops to realize that I was taken care
of. And whenever you're doing down, they'll fight
for you. But by maintaining standards and
enforcing them, that required them to execute.
When you require people to execute, they'll fight
for you in combat. Bringing in better food to take
care of. Any time we were on the move or I had people
out operating independently, I would honor them.
They contact with them constantly by radio,
asking them where they were. Usually, let's say I
was moving my rifle company five miles in the
jungle. I'm the guy steering the train, so to
speak. Everyone else tunes out. He's in charge,
you don't have to worry about him anymore. We might
be strung out over three miles, and I would radio
back to the plume commanders periodically and ask
them where they were. I kept the pressure on them so
that they would have to keep up with where they
were. They might be a half mile or a mile behind me,
but if something happened to me, I was knocked out,
one of them would have to take over. They would have
to call in the artillery and aircraft. They had to
know where they were to do that. And that was part of
the training program that I went through. So that
they would know where they were.
Was this motivational? or the level of motivation
that they felt, is it any different or any lower or
higher than that of an individual coming out of,
say, boot camp?
I'm not sure there's any
thing as motivational as coming out of boot camp
for a young Marine. He has proven himself to be a
Marine. And
he's extremely proud of that. War and combat in the
war is a different situation. You come out of there
knowing that you survived. And that's a different
type of, that's a relief as opposed to a
motivation. After an engagement or a battle, I can
assure you that everyone was on the emotional
high. I won't call it motivation, but the
adrenaline would be up and let's say your battle
ended at 5 o'clock in the afternoon. You may stay
awake all night being unable to sleep or may not be
able to go to sleep until 3 or 4 in the morning
because of the emotional high that you
experienced after the battle. Was the level of
motivation or the way in which you commanded your
men any different from the way you led them in 1963?
Well, the situation was entirely different in 68
and 69 than it was in
63. We didn't have the same problems we were
engaged in. combat or the threat of engaging with
the enemy did not exist in 1963. So I would say, yes,
there was a difference. And as a captain in 68 and
69, I was more experienced, more seasoned. You had
to handle people better. I had a bigger bag of tools
to use
in 1968 than I did in 1963. Sir? Were there any
problems with sexual harassment of the
Vietnamese or the torching of villages?
To my knowledge, there was no problem with sexual
harassment. Again, we were operating in a
no-man's country where everyone was hostile.
There were no females there, as I said, indicated
they were back in the resettlement camps. Those
camps were not guarded by U.S. forces, so there
were no females around, according to Mark.
Torture, I'm aware of
situations where other people got in trouble
because they allowed prisoners of war to be
tortured. I know in my country, I was told after I
took over, That's company commander that after a
big fight. Pick up some of the guys. Rock them
hoping that they would die. Because they had their
good buddy killed. Frustrated. They really
didn't want to take. I know of no one in particular.
or any specific example of an arpeggio that means
he was killed by anyone in my
company. If that did occur, the commanding
officer
should not have
let it occur. And in fairness to him, these could
have been sea stories, and troops like to
embellish things and go on here, unfortunately.
that you want to take prisoners of war. They're a
source of intelligence. You get those guys and you
evacuate them on a helicopter
back to the intelligence agencies as quickly as
you can. During my tour, I know of no atrocities
that were committed anywhere within the 3rd
Marine Committee. Before I went up to the northern
part of Vietnam and took over my company, a captain
who had the company up in the 3rd Marines was sent
down to be named the court-martial because he had
torched the village.
He stayed in the same hooch with me. I thought he was
waiting for
his court-martial. He was convicted of torching
the village. But he was given no punishment,
obviously in his career. But as he told the panel of
colonels that sat on him, the court martians, you
take, you go into a village or you're patrolling an
area and you take fire, rifle fire out of there
every day. You go in, there's no one there, except
some local villagers. I think you know that
they're hiding for the income. They've got caves
and tunnels
and so forth. What happened, I believe, in this
case, I think one day they were taking some fire.
They probably had some casualties. When they went
through, someone just reached up there and lit a
flash through the village.
After he explained that, I remember his words, you
old colonels back here in the rear don't know what
it's like going out there every day and getting
shot at from this one particular village. Pretty
soon, and you know the Viet Cong are there, and that
the villages are hiding them. So I just watched the
Marine Corps court-martialing though. It was
wrong. And so he's crazy. There is another,
there's a colonel
in the Marine Corps right now who was interviewed
on this TV series, a documentary on Vietnam. And I
believe there was a similar type of boy in there. He
may have clutched the legs. I'm not sure. I know he
didn't get court-martialed. But yes, that type of
thing went on. And the guy that's in the field and
lives with it on a daily basis has a different
perspective of the people that are in the rear.
What looks black and white to people from a
distance isn't quite black and white when you're
out there and you're facing them. Is there kind of
a... defend their their acts by by knowing that the
villagers supported them feeling that they did i
mean you can be so so nice to the villagers but when
they go out and they support the uh the vietcong or
whatever you know vietnamization doesn't even
work well they uh they weren't defending their
acts And they didn't kill any of the villagers.
They got the villagers out of the village before
they tortured them. But by eliminating where they
lived, the villagers had to move on, and that was no
longer a trouble spot. That was their thought
process, the torture.
How did the generation of soldiers respond to the
war?
Some
responded extremely well, others not well at all.
I don't know if the difference is a matter of
education or awareness. Some people are natural
fighters. They come from the city and they just
love a good fight.
opposed to fighting, but they got drafted. Those
guys did make themselves
as your good friends in combat. As we know, we had a
lot of people go to Canada. We had draft fighters.
We had people that demonstrated. It was your large
college crowd that did that.
With the media that is available nowadays, it's
much easier to generate support for a movement
than it was, let's say, in 1941 during the
Second World War. It was not a popular war.
Most people didn't understand why we were over
there and fighting. Anyone who didn't understand
that probably was reluctant to go over there.
Those that really put any thought into it, I'd say
would be lucky to go there. Except some people had
to get in the Marines, where to get away from the bad
way of life, where they were brought up.
And I actually, I had Marines under me who just
thrived on being in combat. I had others that did
not. You had stated in your previous interview
that there's, You didn't really know of any
problems with fragging. You had heard of
incidences. But was there a level of instruction
or a low level of instruction that the lieutenants
did not receive or did receive before they went
into Vietnam?
About fragging? Well, no, not about fragging.
somewhat like about leading and having their men
follow them and not having enough experience.
Well, in the Marine Corps, we send all of our junior
officers to basic schools where they're trained
as infantrymen. Then they're sent into their
various schools for their various specialties.
That was a six-month-long school. the top second
lieutenants, the basics of the Marine Corps, from
maintaining a vehicle to the supply system to
leadership, many hours of leadership and
tactics.
So yes, the young leaders or the young officers in
the Marine Corps were prepared before they went in
there. You still have people that aren't the best
leaders, but get thrown into a situation where
they don't lead well,
and they could get cracked in a case like that. A guy
that was a typical chicken and uncomfortable with
the troops for some reason could get cracked.
possibly even staff not commissioned officers
could be, I don't know. The fragging that I heard
about was always back in the rear area, a base camp,
so to speak, where you had a large transit
population going in and out. These were people
that were avoiding going out into the combat
units. They were the recalcitrants.
I don't guess they might have retaliated. I have no
friends and no one by name that was fractured.
You're talking about the staff positions.
What was the general feeling towards the rear
echelon people, being that they had never seen the
front line?
Well, I don't know how to answer that, mainly
because I didn't have any feelings one way or the
other about it. I had my job to do, and I was out there
doing it. The people in the rear had to provide the
support for me and the intelligence. So they were
providing a vital function for me.
Turn that off
just a second. There was the standard joke around
about the USO shows like Bob Hope and the others and
Margaret and so forth. that would come into
Vietnam. It was always the guys in the rear that got
to go to those shows, and never the guys in the
field. The guys up winning the war never got to
enjoy St. Bob Hope and Aunt Margaret or something
like that. And so in that regard, there was
resentment for the folks in the field. I pertain
to, let's say, big decision-making, when a big
operation is going to happen and a general officer
makes a decision, the general officer is not
fighting on the front line. How is that felt by many
of the people on the front line when they had to
follow somebody who didn't really, or in their
mind, they didn't feel that he knew the situation,
what was going on in the front line? I'm not sure
that anyone even thought like that until I didn't
know what the situation was. We all hoped that the
general knew what he was doing, and that any
mission that we were sent on was a valid mission,
because there was always the possibility that you
would lose someone, and you didn't want to lose
someone for a mission that was executed
on time. Yes, sir. What was the general consensus
pertaining to the way people demonstrated back in
the United States against the war?
Well, I don't think you can say there's a general
consensus. If you were a liberal, you would say
that the demonstrations were good and you were all
for them. If you were a conservative, you would say
that the demonstrations were bad. Was there a poll
taken by the media? I'm sure there was with George
Harris and everyone else, and they could say so
many, a certain percentage was for the war and a
certain percentage was not. I don't recall any of
the numbers now, but I'm sure that the majority of
the people supported the war effort initially.
And as the war dragged on, and I mean month by month,
that supported the time. And at some point, I'm
sure it was less than 50% of the nation. I know that
supported the war. I know whenever ICAF came home
from Vietnam in 1969, the general reaction,
people in my home from the people in my hometown.
Well, I guess the war is necessary. You guys are
there for a good cause, but I just wish the war would
be over. The Americans are the nature of the
Americans is we like to get in and do something
quickly. Be done with it, whether it's in business
or anything else. And I think that was the general
attitude toward war. Let's get in and get this
thing over with so we can put it behind us. Were
there specific liberal or conservative
separations in the field, like groups of
individuals who did believe in one way and groups
that believed in another way for the war and
against the war? Oh, I'm sure there were. I'm sure
there were individuals who believed that way.
When you're in a rifle company and you're out in the
field, though, everyone's life depends on how
well the fella next to him does his job. It's called
survival. You don't choose teams, you just decide
to debate when you're out there in the field,
because that's the wrong time.
When I was in the field the whole time, we were back
in the rear area, club, drinking a few beers. I'm
sure they've got decent debates like that. But we
had a job to do. As I say, our survival depended on
everyone doing their job. Were there many racial
problems between whites, blacks, and Vietnamese
in the field? Well, again, we didn't operate with
the Vietnamese, so I didn't see any racial
problems with the Americans and the Vietnamese.
And out in the field, there were
no racial problems. I would not have tolerated
him. When I say that, I wouldn't have. He said, what
would I have done? Had I had problems? I don't know.
But I didn't have any problems. I do know back in the
rear area, the blacks would congregate in one area
and do their thing.
I just don't have any first-hand experience.
But where everyone's life depends on the fellow
next to him, and if he's in a combat situation, we
just don't have that problem. I'm talking about
infantry company, not civil. The guy that you
share a boxhole with, if you're white, may be
black. And the color of the skin doesn't make any
difference when you're in that situation. I had
one platoon that was led by a black sergeant, one of
the finest men I know, a tremendous leader, and he
had no trouble at all running that platoon. When I
was a sergeant running a platoon, I had a shortage
of staff, non-commissioned officers, and this
platoon leader went back to the United States
Three weeks leave, and it took him a while to get
back, but this black sergeant ran the platoon for
about five weeks, and I was lost in responsibility
for a
young man. My weapons platoon commander was a
black staff sergeant,
and he had no problems. So out in the field, I just
didn't experience any problems.